define pod sandbox lifecycle contract (#286)
containerd/nri: docs/pod-sandbox-lifecycle.md

## Event Ordering and Guarantees

Runtimes MUST guarantee the following ordering:

1. **RunPodSandbox** NRI event fires after successful CRI RunPodSandbox execution
2. **StopPodSandbox** NRI event fires during CRI StopPodSandbox execution
3. **RemovePodSandbox** NRI event fires during CRI RemovePodSandbox execution
4. These events MUST fire in strict order: RunPodSandbox → StopPodSandbox → RemovePodSandbox
5. No workload containers will be started until after RunPodSandbox hook completes
6. All workload containers will be stopped before StopPodSandbox hook is called
7. No network resource reclamation should occur during StopPodSandbox hook execution

See the [CRI API specification](https://github.com/kubernetes/cri-api) for details on each CRI operation.

## Plugin Implementation Guidance

### Subscribing to Events

Plugins subscribe to these events during the Configure phase by returning the appropriate event flags in the ConfigureResponse:

- `Event_RUN_POD_SANDBOX` (1 << 0) for RunPodSandbox
- `Event_STOP_POD_SANDBOX` (1 << 1) for StopPodSandbox
- `Event_REMOVE_POD_SANDBOX` (1 << 2) for RemovePodSandbox

> These events are notified via the StateChange RPC call.

Reviewer: This is a wire protocol detail which is going to change once #274 is merged, at which point we are going to have dedicated messages and RPC calls on the wire for every single pod and container life cycle event, and eventually remove `StateChange` after a deprecation period.

I think it would be better to refer here to the stub-offered API which (so far has) always had stronger stability and backward compatibility promise than the wire protocol. So could we perhaps rephrase this as "These events are delivered to plugins using the RunPodSandbox, StopPodSandbox and RemovePodSandbox event handlers." ?

Author: done

### Timeout Handling

All plugin processing must complete within the configured request timeout. Plugins should plan accordingly:

- **RunPodSandbox**: Failure may result in pod creation failure
- **StopPodSandbox**: Non-blocking for subsequent operations; the plugin should not depend on completion of subsequent teardown
- **RemovePodSandbox**: Non-blocking; removal will proceed regardless of plugin timeout

### Error Handling

Plugins should handle errors gracefully and avoid leaving the pod or system in an inconsistent state. Error recovery strategies:

- **RunPodSandbox errors**: Problematic; may block pod creation depending on failure severity and runtime policy

> - **StopPodSandbox errors**: May not prevent scenario termination depending on runtime policy

Reviewer: I think on the teardown path, actually both for pods and containers, we should not allow a plugin to try and prevent the operation with an error. If we agree, then we should clearly state here that, for StopPodSandbox and RemovePodSandbox, a plugin failing with an error will not prevent the operation from proceeding.

The current implementation has incorrect/inconstent behavior in this regard when multiple plugins are involved in the sense that for some of these (or corresponding container) teardown lifecycle events, a failure in a plugin will incorrectly prevent the event from being delivered to subsequent plugins, although it will not prevent the CRI-level operation from proceeding. There is a fix coming in for this, but it is waiting for #274 from get merged first (which is waiting for #277 to get merged first).

Author: @klihub can you please suggest the better wording for this?

I do not feel I'm able to translate that correctly to words :)

Author: ok, let me take a stab at this,  I think now I got what you mean

Author: see new commit rephrasing it

# NRI Pod Sandbox Lifecycle Hooks

## Relationship to CRI API

This specification defines how NRI plugins interact with pod sandbox lifecycle events. The underlying pod sandbox operations are defined by the [Kubernetes CRI API](https://github.com/kubernetes/cri-api):

- **RunPodSandbox (CRI)**: Creates and starts a pod-level sandbox. Runtimes must ensure the sandbox is in the ready state on success.

> - **StopPodSandbox (CRI)**: Stops any running process that is part of the sandbox and reclaims network resources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **StopPodSandbox (CRI)**: Stops any running process that is part of the sandbox and directs the runtime to reclaim certain pod resources (e.g. Network Namespace, CNI teardown, and image mounts). May be called multiple times, and is idempotent. 
```

- **RemovePodSandbox (CRI)**: Removes the sandbox. If there are any running containers, they must be forcibly terminated and removed.

This NRI specification details when and under what conditions NRI plugins receive notifications for these events, ensuring plugins can reliably depend on consistent sandbox state across different runtime implementations.

## Overview

The pod sandbox lifecycle consists of three distinct phases, each with a corresponding NRI event that plugins can subscribe to:

> 1. **RunPodSandbox**: Fired after the runtime successfully executes CRI RunPodSandbox

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **RunPodSandbox**: Fired after the runtime successfully creates the pod, but before setting the pod to running and then replying success to CRI RunPodSandbox request.
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. **RunPodSandbox**: Fired during the the runtime CRI RunPodSandbox execution
```

> 1. **RunPodSandbox**: Fired during the the runtime CRI RunPodSandbox execution, after the PodSandbox is created but before setting the pod to running and then replying success to CRI RunPodSandbox request.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. **RunPodSandbox**: Fired during the runtime CRI RunPodSandbox execution, after the PodSandbox is created but before setting the pod to running and then replying success to CRI RunPodSandbox request.
```

Author: done

2. **StopPodSandbox**: Fired when the runtime initiates CRI StopPodSandbox
3. **RemovePodSandbox**: Fired when the runtime performs CRI RemovePodSandbox

For each event, this specification defines:

- **Sandbox State Contract**: What sandbox infrastructure conditions runtimes MUST satisfy when firing the NRI event
- **Plugin Responsibilities and Capabilities**: What plugins can safely do in response to the event

## RunPodSandbox

**CRI Operation**: RunPodSandbox - Creates and starts a pod-level sandbox.

> **NRI Event Timing**: The RunPodSandbox NRI event is fired after the runtime has successfully executed the CRI RunPodSandbox operation and the sandbox has reached a "Ready" state, but before any workload containers are started.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**NRI Event Timing**: The RunPodSandbox NRI event is fired when the runtime has tentatively finished executing the CRI RunPodSandbox operation but just before setting the pod to the "Ready" state, which occurs immediately after NRI event processing, and thus before any workload containers are/can be started as the Pod is still in the "unknown" state.
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**NRI Event Timing**: The RunPodSandbox NRI event is fired after the runtime has successfully executed most of the CRI RunPodSandbox operation; NRI plugin execution is the final step before the sandbox reaches a "Ready" state. The Kubelet does not start workload containers until after the sandbox becomes "Ready".
```

> **NRI Event Timing**: The RunPodSandbox NRI event is fired after the runtime has successfully executed most of the CRI RunPodSandbox operation; NRI plugin execution is the final step before the sandbox reaches a "Ready" state. The Kubelet does not start workload containers until after the sandbox becomes "Ready".

Reviewer 4: Will container runtime keep retrying or fail on first failure/timeout?

Reviewer: On errors other than plugin timeout, the runtime will fail the pod creation request. On plugin timeout the plugin is kicked out by the runtime.

> ### Sandbox State Contract

Reviewer 4: If NRI plugin timed out, will it receive the Stop event?

Reviewer: If an NRI plugin times out the runtime kicks it out by forcibly disconnecting the plugin.

Author: I think this is related https://github.com/containerd/nri/issues/114

> When the runtime fires the RunPodSandbox NRI event, it guarantees:

Reviewer 4: let's say something about volumes and DRA devices in this list

Reviewer 4: Should DRA downward API be accessible?

Author: this is out of scope of this proposal , that just try to write down current state to avoid problems like the one in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dranet/issues/137 , where CRI-O and Containerd differences break compatibility , having consensus on the hooks lifecycle will allow to provide portability across platforms

The DRA / Kubernetes integration is being discussed in https://github.com/containerd/nri/issues/282

- The Pod-level cgroup hierarchy has been established
- The Sandbox namespaces (IPC, Network, UTS) are created and active
- Network setup has been fully configured (network interfaces are up and assigned addressing)
- The pod IP address (if applicable) is assigned and available
- The "pause" container (if the runtime uses one) is running

> - All prerequisite operations for workload container startup are complete

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- All prerequisite operations for workload container startup are complete, the pod is in the "unknown state" and will become "Ready" once the NRI event is processed. *This guarantees the NRI plugin has a window to allocate resources for the pod before any workload containers are started.
```

> - All prerequisite operations for workload container startup are complete, the pod is in the "unknown state" and will become "Ready" once the NRI event is processed. This guarantees the NRI plugin has a window to allocate resources for the pod before any workload containers are started.

Reviewer 4: Can NRI pluging start it's own processes in this sandbox?

Reviewer: Not by using NRI for this. NRI itself does not provide means for this.

Author: NRI plugin has access to the OCI spec so it knows the necessary data to start its own processes on its own ... although that does not sounds like a good separation of concerns ... network plugins using NRI use to move network interfaces from the host to the network namespace per example

### Plugin Responsibilities and Capabilities

Upon receiving the RunPodSandbox event, plugins can safely:

- Access the network namespace and inspect network configuration
- Perform network-level operations or monitoring
- Inject sandbox-level hardware configurations (e.g., RDMA, RoCEv2)
- Establish plugin-specific tracking or monitoring for the pod

> - Store initial state or baseline metrics for later reference

Reviewer 4: let's clarify the ordering of NRI plugins and what NRI plugin will "see"  if there are multiple plugins.

Reviewer: Currently NRI plugins cannot mutate a pod via NRI. Therefore in the case of multiple plugins, all NRI plugins see identical pod sandbox data.

Plugins should treat this as an initialization phase. The sandbox infrastructure will remain accessible throughout the pod's lifetime until StopPodSandbox is called.

## StopPodSandbox

**CRI Operation**: StopPodSandbox - Stops any running process that is part of the sandbox and reclaims network resources.

**NRI Event Timing**: The StopPodSandbox NRI event is fired when the runtime initiates the CRI StopPodSandbox operation.

### Sandbox State Contract

When the runtime fires the StopPodSandbox NRI event, it guarantees:

- Workload containers within the sandbox are stopped or are stopping
- **CRITICAL**: The sandbox infrastructure still exists and remains fully accessible during this hook

> - The network namespace is not unmounted or deleted until this hook completes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The pod resources allocated by the runtime; such as network namespace, CNI networks, and image mounts; are not unmounted or deleted until this hook completes
```

> **CRI Operation**: StopPodSandbox - Stops any running process that is part of the sandbox and reclaims network resources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**CRI Operation**: StopPodSandbox - Stops any running process that is part of the sandbox and reclaims certain pod resources (e.g. Network Namespace, CNI teardown, and image mounts).
```
repeats text from above... alternatively could end with ...", as described above" instead of listing the resource types

> When the runtime fires the StopPodSandbox NRI event, it guarantees:

Reviewer 4: let's add guarantee: this sandbox will never be reused. There is never a scenario when any new workload (containers) will be started there by container runtime after the first attempt to Stop sandbox.

Author: is this something that existi today and we can guarantee or something we aim to achieve?

Author: yeah, I think it is

> When the runtime fires the StopPodSandbox NRI event, it guarantees:

Reviewer 4: this can be called even if the Run was never called. Mostly for garbage collecting the sandbox which creation was interrupted. E.g. Run called, almost at the end containerd crashed, on restart containerd doesn't know if it needs clean up state so it must call Stop on each NRI plugin. Ortherwise there will be resources leak

Reviewer 2: nod.. at which point I believe the state of the pod would be "unknown"

> - **CRITICAL**: The sandbox infrastructure still exists and remains fully accessible during this hook

Reviewer 4: can runtime guarantee that the state is "good enough" to start another container in this sandbox?

Reviewer 2: no.. this is currently post stopping the pod which includes killing the containers and the pod container, during which when the pod container is killed and during exit processing of it's task the pod state is set to NotReady, which subsequently blocks new containers on the pod.  This call is pre-tear down of certain pod resources, noting there was a discrepancy in the crio placement of the call, WIP to nomalize.  

We could add another call earlier in the stop processing if we want to add the goal of creating notifications that stop pod has been requested. And possibly a third call to indicate the pod containers are stopped but the pod container is still running and thus another container can be added.

- The pod's cgroups remain accessible
- All pod-level resources remain stable until this hook returns

> ### Plugin Responsibilities and Capabilities

Reviewer 4: responsibility: this event processing must be re-entrant.

Author: can you expand more on what you expect to see?
we can warn to plugin authors that if they do not make the logic reentrant then they will have problems ... but we can not enforce nothing here, you just define an interface, if the people implementing the interface makes it wrong 🤷

StopPodSandbox is the designated cleanup and observation phase for plugins. Upon receiving this event, plugins can:

- Access the pod's network namespace to read final telemetry or metrics
- Collect final state for observability or troubleshooting
- Detach hardware interfaces or reconfigure resources
- Clean up custom firewall configurations, routing rules, or other network-level state
- Perform graceful cleanup or resource release before sandbox teardown

**Important**: Plugin processing must complete within the configured request timeout. Do not assume sandbox access persists after this hook returns or times out.

## RemovePodSandbox

**CRI Operation**: RemovePodSandbox - Removes the sandbox and forcibly terminates any remaining containers.

> **NRI Event Timing**: The RemovePodSandbox NRI event is fired when the runtime initiates the CRI RemovePodSandbox operation, during final garbage collection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**NRI Event Timing**: The RemovePodSandbox NRI event is fired by the runtime just prior to removing the pod from the pod list.
```

Reviewer 3: The runtime doesn't initiate RemovePodSandbox, the Kubelet does.

> **Important**: Plugin processing must complete within the configured request timeout. Do not assume sandbox access persists after this hook returns or times out.

Reviewer 4: Again, I think we need to say that there will be a retry if timeout happened.

Reviewer 4: From that perspective, can we say that it can be assumed as long as plugin keeps returning error?

Author: As commented before, the goal is to document current state, not to make a proposal on how it should behave , this specific topic is discussed more in detail in https://github.com/containerd/nri/issues/114 . We also need to be careful on changing behaviors since those will break compatibility with existing plugins

### Sandbox State Contract

> When the runtime fires the RemovePodSandbox NRI event:

Reviewer 4: another guarantee is that it never be called until the Stop succeeded

Author: we already have `- The StopPodSandbox operation has completed` , is not that covering this comment?

- All workload containers have been removed
- The StopPodSandbox operation has completed
- Network setup teardown may be underway or complete
- The pod's namespaces (Network, IPC, UTS) may have already been deleted
- Pod-level cgroups may be destroyed
- Sandbox infrastructure access is **not guaranteed**

> ### Plugin Responsibilities and Capabilities

Reviewer 4: Plugin must be reentrant here as well

Author: good point

RemovePodSandbox is strictly for plugin-internal cleanup. Plugins MUST NOT attempt to access pod infrastructure (namespaces, cgroups, network configuration) during this hook, as their existence is not guaranteed.

Plugins receiving this event should only:

- Clean up plugin-internal memory caches or object tracking associated with the podSandboxID
- Remove host-level tracking files, database entries, or other locally stored pod references
- Release any plugin resources held for this specific pod
- Perform final accounting or bookkeeping

**Important**: This hook is informational only. Plugins should not assume any pod infrastructure exists. Only clean up information the plugin created or stored internally.

## Event Ordering and Guarantees

Runtimes MUST guarantee the following ordering:

> 1. **RunPodSandbox** NRI event fires after successful CRI RunPodSandbox execution

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **RunPodSandbox** NRI event fires after successful CRI RunPodSandbox execution, but before the pod is set to the "Ready" state
```

> 2. **StopPodSandbox** NRI event fires during CRI StopPodSandbox execution

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. **StopPodSandbox** NRI event fires during CRI StopPodSandbox execution, just prior to removing the runtime pod resources allocated by the runtime; such as network namespace, CNI networks, and image mounts
```

3. **RemovePodSandbox** NRI event fires during CRI RemovePodSandbox execution
4. These events MUST fire in strict order: RunPodSandbox → StopPodSandbox → RemovePodSandbox
5. No workload containers will be started until after RunPodSandbox hook completes

> 6. All workload containers will be stopped before StopPodSandbox hook is called

Reviewer 4: this contradicts the contract above. It was saying stopped or being stopped:

> - Workload containers within the sandbox are stopped or are stopping

Reviewer 2: nod was wondering why the "or" didn't get a chance to verify that

Author: This is coming from the API definition in CRI https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/bb0bcb8a85d54fad8f8f3aa036aa751c73138edb/staging/src/k8s.io/cri-api/pkg/apis/services.go#L73-L75

> 	// StopPodSandbox stops the sandbox. If there are any running containers in the
	// sandbox, they should be force terminated.
	StopPodSandbox(ctx context.Context, podSandboxID string) error

Although, the question here is if the runtimes are already doing this "force termination" step before calling the NRI hook or is undefined ... or if we want to define it and make it deterministic

7. No network resource reclamation should occur during StopPodSandbox hook execution

See the [CRI API specification](https://github.com/kubernetes/cri-api) for details on each CRI operation.

## Plugin Implementation Guidance

### Subscribing to Events

Plugins subscribe to these events during the Configure phase by returning the appropriate event flags in the ConfigureResponse:

- `Event_RUN_POD_SANDBOX` (1 << 0) for RunPodSandbox
- `Event_STOP_POD_SANDBOX` (1 << 1) for StopPodSandbox
- `Event_REMOVE_POD_SANDBOX` (1 << 2) for RemovePodSandbox

These events are delivered to plugins using the RunPodSandbox, StopPodSandbox and RemovePodSandbox event handlers.

### Timeout Handling

> All plugin processing must complete within the configured request timeout. Plugins should plan accordingly:

Reviewer 4: this statement is hard to parse as a spec. I suggest to specify that the timeout is treated as error by runtime

Author: done

- **RunPodSandbox**: Failure may result in pod creation failure
- **StopPodSandbox**: Non-blocking for subsequent operations; the plugin should not depend on completion of subsequent teardown

> - **RemovePodSandbox**: Non-blocking; removal will proceed regardless of plugin timeout

Reviewer 4: why are we not guaranteeing successful execution here? It may lead to resource leak. With DRA we guarantee successful unprepare call, why shouldn't we do the same here?

Reviewer 2: we have discussed MUST run plugins vs optional plugins. Is a good point that in this RM processing we need to also consider which of the plugins MUST complete, or possibly cause leaks.

Reviewer 5: We have discussed the required vs optional and the role of each plugin in the past

### Error Handling

On the teardown path, plugin errors MUST NOT prevent the operation from proceeding. Runtimes MUST ensure that a failing plugin cannot block pod or container teardown:

- **RunPodSandbox errors**: A plugin error may prevent the pod from being created, depending on runtime policy. Plugins bear responsibility for errors they return at this phase.

> - **StopPodSandbox errors**: A plugin error MUST NOT prevent the sandbox from being stopped. The runtime MUST proceed with teardown regardless of plugin failures.

Reviewer 4: why? Is there any alternative way for plugin to handle clean up if runtime will not guarantee call and retry?

Reviewer 2: One alternative:  on sync of the list of pods a plugin may be able to normalize it's internal list of pods with resources vs the actual sync list.

Reviewer 5: If the RunPodSandbox allocates a resource that is finite, and StopPodSandbox errors, and we continue this would result in a problem? Today, we stop the process and keep trying.

- **RemovePodSandbox errors**: A plugin error MUST NOT prevent the sandbox from being removed. The runtime MUST proceed with removal regardless of plugin failures.

### Multi-Plugin Coordination

> When multiple plugins are active:

Reviewer 4: if plugin didn't exist on sandbox creation and was notified about existing sandboxes on loading. What is the guarantee on consistency between that notification and plugin Stop/Remove calls?

Author: I do not fully understand the question, the notifications are events generated by the runtime IIUIC, so the only guarantee is that you get the events when they happen ... plugins should reconcile the state using the `Synchronize` hook to receive all existing Pods running at the startup
